so yeah so I'm going to talk about the
uneasy space between art design and this
is maybe gonna go a little bit fast
because this is actually a talk that I
just gave it residi except that was 45
minutes this is a little own a gun but i
like to say that really this is it this
is the talk this is a slightly
biographical thought about about the
transition that i made personally from
be more nervous than engineer into
working in design culture and how I came
to appreciate and find something equally
creative and reassuring avoid has been
slightly bizarre world for me to enter
so people ask me what I do I say
depending on who they are I make
electronic sort code or you know I do 3d
modeling or industrial design firm and
sign on a programmer but with you my
people I like to say i am a cultural
worker and I seen it and don't say
glibly I think the teaching that I do
and the writing that I do and the things
that I made and the communities that I
tried
and everything that I try to do to me
feels like cultural work and so when I
get involved with something I look at it
as the culture them I'm looking at the
culture of technology i'm looking at the
culture of the you know the communities
in which i involved the communities in
which I you know I'm giving access to
however like most of you I have a job
and these things sort of intersect but
they don't totally intersect and in my
day job my my business card says
designer and I most definitely work in
the design industry I work at a company
called T which is an industrial design
firm and it's a really old industrial
design firm and just one second I just
want to see my notes here
oh yeah okay so once yeah you can tell
there's doing some work over there yeah
okay cool all right so it's a really old
industrial design from the sonic 1926
and it's been very interesting for me
because I am I didn't go to the store
tonight school until much later in life
my background is actually more in art
and I as an undergrad studied a lot of
other things but the stuff that stuck
with me was the sculpture classes that I
took so people like Gordon at a Clark
and Agnes Martin and Chris bourbon I
really really really wanted to be an
artist and I put a huge amount of time
into trying to make art and I realized
that there couple years of trying to do
it that it wasn't very good at it so I
stopped trying to be an artist and I
went through a sort of below where I was
just making things for money and that
was fine until i came across a book by
dieter rent and this showed me is sort
of like happy medium that was trying to
find between needing to be an expressive
creative person but being deeply a
handful of that and also you know need
something kind of practical something
that didn't require me to worry about
self-expression you mean or my own
existence in the world so much design
nice because you get given a brief work
on and you can express and you can have
on your own politics he isn't but you
kind of beholden to somebody else and
you know for whatever reason I was
deeply attracted to me so I went to see
ID in Copenhagen and it was amazing and
if you are curious about this school I'm
happy to tell you about it they go back
and teach there every year and I'm going
back in a couple months and so I went to
CID aesthetic design I came out and I
have a day job and or start both this is
backwards because I spend a lot of time
doing my own personal projects like
building a radio scanner that takes all
the electromagnetic radiation around you
and turns it into a pretty sound and you
wear this full sensory deprivation mask
and that's what I do at night and during
the day I'm here and we do things like
this this is the inside of the first
class cabin in canadia or air canada on
the whole company and light not me so
much i work more in the R&D group but we
do a lot of planes and we do everything
in the plane like everything the sea
carpet lights bottom is the tables
overhead bins and its really interesting
like everything you see in this picture
except the logo was done by my country
it is incredibly complex stuff like
making things at this scale and making
things that this type is insane and it's
a world to which I had no access
previously we also do our own projects
like building a bike and so we design a
bicycle and now we're building 10,000 of
them start selling them soon and that is
also a scale and type of production to
which I had no access previously sitting
around making large things myself like
you know this is me in my room at home
this is a factory in China
this is it's been very interesting to
get into that we do things like build 3d
printed headphone set sir you can
download the files and build your own
and this is pitch as being something for
the maker community but I feel
personally that's kind of a propaganda
move on our part because when we design
something it gets built here and this is
the reality so we can show 3d printers
and we're playing with them in QT
designer so it this is where it happens
and I like I'm saying I appreciate
deeply being given a front seat to this
because I have learned something I have
come to a realization is to me very
important to me and that's that all of
us are in a bad of a sort we this is
that upon which we lay in spring we or
the fish and tech capitalism is the
fishbowl this is what surrounds us I
have a proposition make creative
packages should engage their origins
materials and that's classic you know
material is our proposition if you're
going to use something in your creative
practice you should think about what it
is if you borrow archaeometry think
about ads and commerce you're going to
work at steel think about steel
foundries and buildings you know
something creative and communicated in
responsible in the world to think about
should think about the things which
created which allowed to exist that it's
medium if you will and so for us making
things with code and electronics I think
our creative practices should engage the
should engage techno capitalism the
things that make our work possible build
the things on which our runs the the
ideas upon which most of our work is
founded like the fundament of what
enables us to do things we need to
consider that relationship all right so
little little bit I'm trying to tear
apart art and design and that may seem
like kind of a stupid thing to do trying
like keys in the heart but I think
they're actually it's interesting to see
how similar they are one another in in
all ways except one which I want to
point out so they both have like there's
sort of iconic space so you know you
have an art gallery this make nice clean
white walls and wood floors in the
design studio just well wooden floor and
you have the place of public celebration
and you have the place of public
celebration and we have the iconic music
origins and you have the iconic origins
and you have the reality of making
things which is it very few well not
everything but lots of artists don't
make them and stuff and that's not new
that's not something that's like you
know the recent development Rembrandt
actually had in contracts the number of
brush strokes you can put in their
painting because everybody knew and
design despite our pretending otherwise
is not DIY it that's craft designs like
do it industrially the idea of design
blossomed during the industrial
evolution it really wasn't designed
before that it was just you were going
to make something so you made it and
suddenly you could have a factory make
it so you had a designer and also design
has ours are both art and design have
history that mirrors the political and
social movements of the time so you know
they're there are changes that you can
see in the Art and Design mirror trends
and anxieties advances a fabrication
chemistry of comments etc these both
shape or design side by side and another
thing this is exit out design really
wants to be like art because a lot of
art is a lot of Catholic over your
relationship capitalism art objects
aren't like art objects aren't bought
and sold in the same way as most other
objects are they're not value the same
way the labor that goes into theirs and
value the same way and the the
relationship that they have to larger
economies the institutions that support
them are I think to the design world in
view you can always you know if you just
need somebody to write some code you can
kind of like just get somebody who's
going to do some coaching something bill
and get machine factory and get cheaper
hands to do it but when you position
design is something that's sort of this
all-encompassing weird way of making
things more valuable and more magical
and different than what their source
materials actually are that's something
that you can't automate a way you can't
just have that offshore or outsourced or
over there you know automate it away or
you know right we're going to do that
for you if it's something kind of
intangible and magical and infiltrates
everything in maintenance so I think
it's on purpose that designers try to
position
next to art there's one big difference
and it's a really interesting difference
that art and capital and art
introduction have a very complex
relationship and design capital and
design production is really really
simple did you know you make it you send
it off it gets made that's you know
whether it was in river or if it was
built by children or shrimp whatever
awful thing happened like you as the
designer can be responsible for that but
you're not required to that's not really
in the ethos of design especially
industrial design especially design for
manufacturing and production yeah okay
so that was a little bit little sidebar
so I have a theory that a little while
ago design stuff may need one thing but
it always means production you
capitalize we participate in capitals
and I think this started in the 1980s
with idea and it became kind of a
shorthand for any sort of structuring
user-centered activity um but the
feeling is that like in hyper catabolism
that's everything like everything is
purchasable and everything as a service
and every interaction is some kind of
economic transaction and whenever you're
shaking one of those things you're
designing and so people can kind of
pretend design isn't that that it's
something else and I that like I love
the Tim Brown wrote an article called
capitals you need to design thinking
because that's sort of like saying that
like era needs people to breathe it
desperately needs things to live on it
like that is what makes design as what
makes designed possible and I haven't
said anything good about design culture
and i want to say those making
commercial objects brings you in a weird
contact with production and that's a
valuable thing making one or two of
something is very very different than
making a few hundred thousand and how
things are made is a really fascinating
way to understand the world and
understand human elements of the things
the objects that surround us the people
and the systems that are in place for it
maybe commercial objects also brings you
into weird contact so like a pure profit
motive reality is a very very
interesting place to visit it's it's
strange thing to see and it's I think
just as relevant and just as important
to understand as a purely religious
value system is or purely insane value
system or anything that is external to
your own value system whatever that may
be to find something that feels a little
external to it and it challenges it i
think is an interesting it's an
interesting place to force yourself into
try to understand that communicate with
it and we are in very very weird
capitalism I think that we s if you if
you if you take nothing else away from
this talk I guess we live in a world
made out of innovation centric activity
we have a lemon tree the world of very
weird capital and the question that i
find myself pondering a lot is how we
meaningfully communicate with that world
that world of weird capital
rural innovation center activity and
meaningfully being the operative word
not just using its products are taking
its money or I its value systems because
we all kind of in one way or another in
in so many little ways that we do some
advertising work reducing design work
we're doing that we can acknowledge it
or not that there's anything offers a
interesting path into a meaningful way
of communicating with this strange
activity that is going on around us and
there's a lot of different terms that
get thrown around for design that is not
playing by the traditional rules of
design and I like all of them and I
don't want to embrace any one of them
and I certainly don't want to make up my
own new term but I really love the idea
of propositional design I think the term
proposition sounds right for something
that is future looking investigation
into what can be made I think critical
design is great because criticality is
core to interrogate and understanding an
underlying system not taking things at
pure face value and an eight fiction is
a fantastically rich way of looking at
making strange things or strange times
we live in a life in I like to say
perpetual anticipation of the next great
thing because we're in the midst of a
reinvention of our social bonds of our
value systems of our economics of how
things get made of the language that we
speak all these in like mundane things
in life and we already kind of live in
fiction because we live in promises made
by
it is not always entirely interested in
the consequences of the decisions and
artifacts that it's producing and I
think that's something that design does
really well I think design addresses the
desire for the next great thing because
that's what it's become it's sort of a
vague future promise and interesting
things happen when you get new tactics
to speak with when you get new tactics
to understand when you get new tactics
to communicate think one of the
challenges of trying to make strange
things or to make propositions about how
the future can different it's finding a
language in which to do it and we're
gonna have to steal from things that
communicate well with big systems we
want to engage how our own work is
engendered by and participates in those
big systems so the minister is slightly
quicker so once a long time there was a
thing called net art in the night and I
don't know who remembers Jody but the
network was the art and that was a
totally valid proposition and it was an
explosion of new kinds of creativity and
new kind understandings of this hidden
thing that was around it was a way to
take it and turn it into something
playful but also something that unmasked
it and something that made it both a
possible world to explore and experiment
with but also a like an avenue for
critical expression so my question is
why not why is ISM like the you can take
this idea their network being or and
turn that same sentiment of taking an
existing structure in existing music
communication production and look at how
product can be the same thing so just
couple projects that I've
we like and one of my own slipped in
there for context people keep her is
something by Lauren McCarthy new comic
Donald where she's looking at actually
creating a device and a app that
monitors your stress levels an emotional
state and then basically tells you who
usually or should not be and it is in
our project but it's pitched through
this kind of cheery better living
through ABS language it was started that
I think we're all familiar with and I
find this sort of like product as art
really deeply meaningful because it's
taking it's helping us understand what
the actual pitch is in IOT and app and
monitoring yourself and this quantified
life and they do it like the main it
looks real and when it's something looks
really have to treat it is real and
suddenly it stops existing just in the
box of it being art it looks like saying
that is out in the world and you have to
wonder about what it means actually have
something tell you should not like I
worked on a project called the bracket
where you have an ankle bracelet that
you wear on your ankle and you tell it
how much money you make and when you
walk into a census tract where your
income is ten thousand dollars more or
less than the median income in that
census tract you get a slow steady
electrical shock
and it's got a two-time TV but it's also
like I'm extremely late CIF Seattle has
the same things going on the San
Francisco we were watching neighborhoods
change dramatically rapidly and people
be both ecstatic about it I'm happy
about it and I don't have anything
deeper to say about this other than we
all know were uncomfortable about it and
I don't know that it even knows what
even more vague and more weird and more
fantastic and adding more more rich is
idea taking services like these vague
things that are beyond like a device is
thing and it's got a battery and it's
got a network that I connect to a
service not only as a thin device but it
is also the idea that there's an entire
company behind it in pitching pitching
an art project this way I think it asks
you to consider not only what makes not
only what the thing does but who makes
it and who uses it and why they wanted
and how they continue to to interact
with it over time so there's a project
by revital Cohen called life support
which is one of the reasons why I went
to design school because I realized like
making things could ask really large
questions about about how we interact
with excuse me the things around us that
are alive what our obligations to them
are it changed how I thought about
design when someone said here is my
design project it is a sheep that is a
dialysis machine and you plug into the
Sheep to clean your blood for you while
you sleep or here is a dog that breathes
for you and to just like ask you to
think deeply about your relationship to
living things and the the extensions to
our own body with which we are very very
comfortable and to think of those not
only as just things but like these are
products that you can buy in imagine the
world in which this is a product you can
buy and this is a product that people
live with and you go over to your
friend's house and like yeah that's my
breathing dog cool all right that's
normal um
there was another one from this is also
an RCA project the Intel Cypress merger
from Zoey papadopoulou who just proposed
that because Intel and Cypress had about
the same GDP maybe they should just
merge um and I think it takes national
sovereignty and treats it like it's just
another economic organization it's just
sort of a convenient social and economic
thing that happens you know like a bunch
of people get together I mean I'm
simplifying this dramatically but the
the idea of like corporation and you
know nation being more or less like
equivalent is both really insane and
then in the era of dubai and qatar maybe
not all that insane i mean maybe it
actually is just a fairly normal thing
to propose but she did it in this like
she's got this video and she had all
these promotional materials like welcome
to cyprus you know i can't remember who
the chairman of Intel was at the time
but you know just sort of like here's
why you should do this and she had all
these graphs and it was this very
professional presentation proposing
essentially something that asks us to
reconsider what nationality and what
boundary and border mean a more recent
project is people making smell dating
where take a brain is not only devising
a service that is provocative and I
think ticks all the boxes to be in our
project but she's also getting regular
users for it I would encourage you to go
look at the website for smell dating
because it has so many amazing videos of
people's noses and they're just like
devouring other people's clothing so you
get sent a bunch of clothes and you
smell them all and you dishonor you
determine based on the smell of the
clothes whether you want to meet that
person or not so instead of swiping
through tinder you're just having this
really rich olfactory experience um and
I think it asks us to reconsider
attraction and asked us to reconsider
the role that services and startups and
apps and groups of people who are making
money off of us play in our romantic
lives and I think that's a really
fascinating thing to ask us to think
about and you you can ask someone to
think about that or you can propose to
someone a whole new mode of interaction
which is strange strange enough to be
considered deeply but familiar enough
that you can see yourself doing it and I
think that's what all of these projects
hopefully to you feel like it's
something that is both at once very
familiar and feels like a sensible
reasonable thing to do and at the same
time or in enough and strange enough
that it reveals what lies underneath it
um so maybe the device is the art or
maybe the image of the start up around
the device is the art or maybe the
society that embraces the device or the
service or both or even has the desire
for this object is the art and those to
me are deeply interesting arts and
that's an art that I really want um I
really want one that engages what it
means to make things or make not things
or have weird economies or weird desires
or weird interactions with the people
and the objects around us that are
mediated by systems that we may or may
not be aware of or understand fully or
participate in um I naively or not I
deeply believe in the idea of an art
that addresses that and makes it visible
to us and so despite working at a very
very manufacturing oriented design firm
that has given me a lot of very strange
feelings about making things and
factories and how production really
works I have seen in its in its
strategies for communicating with
production and capital what I think are
really rich lessons for making things
for creative practices that engage
larger systems around us so with that I
will say the obligatory this is where
you can find me and I would be happy to
talk to you in person or online about
any of these things and thank you very
much
you